I mean, that's one of the problems with the Hanoi.
Okay. Why do we use a one-year tour instead of a
duration tour? Well, this was what they decided to
do, and
I don't think we would use duration ever, really. I
mean, we didn't use it in the Second World War. But
that one year, I think, was a mistake.
because it's hard to build up the morale of units
and get used to them. But I think two years would
have been better, or eighteen months. We've had
quite a few men who've said, because it wasn't even
units that win, it was individuals— That's
correct. —and that you get to battle and you really
want to know if that guy behind you is going to stay
there or turn around and run. That's right. Well,
that's a debatable issue. They did it because they
wanted people to know that They'd much rather have
a great many Americans go over there and do their
year than to hang the burden of this on a limited
number of people. And they were worried initially
also about
how Americans from a temperate climate would
operate in a tropical climate and so on, because
parts of it were tropical. So there were a number of
considerations, and, you know, it's a perfectly
good issue
asked several times that they be mobilized.
I don't know. See, I didn't remember in 1965. I came
in in 1966, and a lot of the decisions were made in
1965 before my time. I don't know. You're talking
about the—you mean the— National Reserve. You
mean the National Guard? Yes, sir. Well, I don't
know. We had conscription, and the—I don't know. I
mean, a lot of people in the National Guard were
conscripted, but I don't know the answer to that
question. Okay. Thank you. The U.S. did not want to
create an image of a colonial empire fighting in
Asia, and what impact did this have on
decision-making as far as maybe troop strength
and maybe even the role of the military as far as
maybe the general having one—Harvin in the U.S.
under one command, under one leader?
Well, Westy had command of everything but
effective command, even over
most of the naval forces that were close in. One
thing he didn't have were the B-36s, but he had a lot
of B-52s, rather, but he had a lot of influence over
the targets on the B-52s. I don't think the
question of unity of command was terribly
important in the fight. And I don't think the
question of not appearing in a colonial empire or
anything like that. We were fighting for the
independence of this country as we were in Korea,
and we had more non-U.S. forces there. We had two
Australians, New Zealanders, two Korean
Philippines. That was mainly cosmetic. But the—I
don't know. We weren't—that was for the
newspapers back home and the student protesters,
not for the people of Asia. They knew what we were
doing.
How much did LBJ's belief that the U.S. was the
policeman of the world make his commitment to
Vietnam even stronger?
really are a silly young man. Who, what is your
evidence that he believed the United States was
the policeman of the world? Well, to tell you the
truth, I read it out of John Stessinger's book
here, Crusaders and Pragmatists, and that's what
he considers LBJ, that possibly us going into
Guatemala in 1965. He didn't go to Guatemala in
1965. Or the Dominican Republic.
the Latin Americans wouldn't acknowledge it, but
then he had an OAS operation there, a very
successful OAS election, and he was in there for
serious strategic reasons under OAS doctrine.
But the point about it is, if you've ever worked
with a president, you know, the last thing in the
world he wants to do is commit U.S. forces. The last
thing. And the notion that, I don't care who, I
don't know who Sessinger is, but The point is that
the notion—and there are any number of cases in the
six, eight years I was there in which, you know, we
just let something happen rather than get
involved, whether it was Westerion or Ghana or,
you know, Guinea or Guantanamo, where you just
turned off the water, you know, and they turned off
the water, so we went and got another alternative
source of water. president the last thing in the
world, because aside from the human fact that
people get killed when you start fighting, and
you're commander-in-chief, and don't think
that's trivial. You lose all sense of it in these
books you read. But the other thing a politician
knows, he's going to lose in the polls by getting
involved, unless it's some very, you know, quick,
cosmetic thing like Grenada. But the
they know what happened at Truman and what happens
in any protracted war on democracy. So Lyndon
Johnson had, you know, burning cities, a
tremendous program he wanted to get through. He
inherited the race crisis, which from Watson on
was roaring through the northern cities, a really
very dangerous phase. wanted to do a lot about
social welfare, and he did. And he had this war he
inherited. The notion that he was out looking to be
a policeman of the world was just nonsense.
My last question would be, did Nixon overcome the
Tocqueville Oscillation, or did he give in to it?
Well, it's a good question. It's the first good
question you've asked. I think that he was, there
was a certain amount of it that he felt he had to give
in to. You know, the Guam Doctrine were pulling
back, and I remember at that time a Soviet didn't
sit. Well, our policy will be to move into the empty
chairs left by U.S. diplomacy. And there was that
69 thing, which
doctrine of extending power around the whole
periphery of Asia, from Vladivostok through the
Indian Ocean to Ethiopia, which was enunciated by
Brezhnev about that. But basically, I think if he
hadn't collapsed with Watergate,
you might have had a fairly stable period. I don't
think for a minute they would have gone in in 75.
And, uh, but once the system, the president lost
legitimacy. And that took place in the course of
the year 73, I'd say, before he actually was
president. You could just see it dragging him down
and limiting him, and then the Congress getting
like a voracious animal.
What is it? And the domestic economy really is
struggling, too. And the domestic economy is
struggling. Well, that's why this thing is so
interesting. Communists do something which they
call correlation of force analysis. If you want to
see what it is, get
this fellow's account and see what he takes into
account here. And it's fascinating, because it
really is He says, well, we took stock. We took
stock. And here's what they said, all right.
Morale was shot and was greatly weakened with the
enemy's forces. Fiscal, 72, 73—this was fiscal
years. The U.S. had given the puppet troops 2.2
billion. This aid was reduced to 900 million, 73,
74, 700 million. Thieu was then forced to fight a
poor man's war. Mobility was reduced by a half.
Then here comes Watergate scandals,
resignation, Nixon, economic recession,
mounting inflation, serious unemployment, and
an oil crisis. And those things lined all up
together.
cut to his throat, and they're tied up with all this
stuff, and that's why they did it. I don't think
they would have done it if Nixon—after all, he had
the biggest victory, practically, as big a
victory as any president had in 72, which is not—it
was partly peace and prosperity, but it was partly
running against McGovern, a very weak candidate.
And he had a clear run, and he blew it. And this whole
system went out of whack. And, of course, you did
have these problems, the other problems, but it
was mainly a situation in which the president
self-destructed, and the system doesn't work
without a president. So I think that it's—he had a
fair chance. In fact, I did a paper the other day,
delivered it in Ohio, on how the Cold War might end.
It's really on the Tocqueville Oscillation. I
said in retrospect, I think this third cycle we've
had was unnecessary,
and—but I won't burden you with that. The short
answer is to your question. I think Nixon had a
chance, but water gave blue. Okay. And then
something semi—a lot of people now are starting
to—the Vietnam Syndrome, I believe you know, we
were in. pretty much with Carter, that we don't
want to get involved. We're sort of almost
isolationist. And in Central America now, a lot of
people are making comparisons between Vietnam
and Central America and saying, you know, we're
going down the same road. So are we currently then
with Central America involved in the
oscillation, in your opinion? Do you think we
could maybe do more than we're doing? I don't know
enough about Central America. I've written,
well, a dozen or so books since leaving
government, and this was the second of them. And I
really haven't worked on it. So I don't know about
Central America. Off the hip, maybe? What is it?
Off the hip, just shooting away what you think just
off the top of your head? No, I'm not going to shoot
off— There we go. Well, can I turn off the tape
recorder and then maybe— No, I don't really know.
Before you can form a serious judgment, you've got
to know, I don't know what the internal situation
is in Nicaragua. I've got an impression I don't
know what the Russians feel, whether the Russians
want to push this hard or Castro wants to push it
hard. I don't have any—there's too many questions
I can't answer, so let's leave it. My last question
here— This is the third last question. This is my
last one. This is your last one. This is. I
guarantee it. You stated that Johnson said that in
this job you must set a standard for making
decisions. That's right. Mine is, what will my
grandchildren think of my administration when
I'm buried under the tree at the ranch? Correct.
What do you think they will think of his policy in
Vietnam now, twenty years after we got initially
involved? I tell you, I don't think it's—
I don't think we will know. I'll tell you why. Are
you still trying to figure it out? No, I'll tell you
something else. I think that
the importance he attached to Southeast Asia and
Asia will be recognized as correct. the notion
that, as one of my old friends and colleagues said
at the time, let's return Southeast Asia to the
obscurity it so richly deserves. I don't think
that's it. That is going to be the view of history. I
think it's an extremely important strategic part
of the world. And out of the accident of the way it
happened in 75,
the worst didn't happen. It's really the next to
the worst happened. If the President of the United
States had said, this is all a mistake, I'm pulling
out, and Congress backed him, then you would have
had a true catastrophe. But Congress did it. The
President stood out. Maya Ghez was a symbol of
that, and Ford. And then Ford, and then Jimmy
Carter, and now Reagan have thrown their weight of
support behind ASEAN.
you're left with a very dangerous position for
Thailand and the Russians in Cam Ranh Bay and the
Russians at the Vang airfield. But still,
Southeast Asia has not collapsed. Indochina has
collapsed. And what we're trying to prevent is
what we have now, which is communist forces on this
long and very difficult frontier of Thailand.
Now, if out of the dynamics of history
Finally, they never get around to trying to take
over Thailand. If they do, there's going to be a
war. Let's take the best. There's no way they have
to take over Thailand. Finally, a generation
comes along in Hanoi and says, We can't go on at
seventy-five dollars per income. Everyone
around here has got two thousand dollars. We've
got to develop like the rest of Asia. And they get
bored with being colonial power in Cambodia and
Laos, go home and start raising some, you know,
industry. They'd be very good at it if they could
only get some leaders who were interested in it.
And they become part of Asia, this vital Asia, and
the whole thing subsides.
Then what'll it be? It'll be what Lyndon Johnson
did. And the people of Asia was by ten critical
years
I think everyone would agree, and if you look back,
the thing would have collapsed in 55 if the United
States had said, sorry, boys, you're nice
fellows, but this is not our interest. We signed
that thing in 55, but we don't really believe it's
in 65.
But it was different ten years later. So there's a
fair chance, but I don't know. that people will
say, well, it was not what they should have done,
and if they went into it, they should have won. But
in any case, an independent Southeast Asia is the
result, which is stabilizing for
everybody—India, China—is a result of the very
painful ten years that America took and the
South—people in the area took. It's not what—the
way he meant it to happen, but the ten years had that
result.
Otherwise, of course, Lyndon Johnson is a major
figure in the history of Asia. And that's what I had
to go and talk at Hofstra in Vietnam, and I didn't
particularly want to. I picked one point that's
missed in all these history books. I said, I'm not
going to debate all these old things again. But
something you perhaps don't know, which is not
only Lyndon Johnson's view of Asia, and Howe's
position on Vietnam related to that. But Howe's
decision related to his civil rights position.
And he—it all ties into the convergence of his
struggle for the 1957 Civil Rights Act and
statehood for Hawaii. But I went into that little
story.
And he really had a sense how important the issue
was going to be, and he didn't require a computer to
calculate it, even an abacus, he could see. And he
talked, I don't know, he looked at this passage in
his East-West Center speech when he started out in
66. But if there's a chance that
it'll come out tolerably well, in that very
limited sense I've just expressed But it may not,
and he may not. And if it does, then another war has
to be fought over the independence, because no one
is going to let Southeast Asia be taken over by a
major power, not China or Russia or India or U.S.
And so if there's a real plunge for Thailand,
I don't think the Russians know that. And the
Russians have got a lot of problems, so it may not
happen.
Thank you very much.